---
layout: post
title: OSCON 2007 wrap-up
categories: conferences
tags: oscon
stopwords:
last_modified:
original_url:
---

I'm getting around to listening to the OSCON presentations. I don't
go to them at the conference because there are much more interesting
things to do, like stay in the hotel room and watch the Tour de France,
or even sleep.

Here's my two sentence review of the presentation:

**Commoditisation of IT and What the Future Holds** by Simon
Wardley: London Perl Monger and Fontango-an Simon Wardley builds on
Nick Carr's claim that IT Doesn't Matter. Because, hey, look at the
quality of customer service when everyone uses the same thing.

**Copyright Regime vs. Civil Liberties** by Rick Falkvinge: Rick
talks about the Pirate Party in Sweden, their copyright-reform
platform, and how the youth vote is going to change the world. We all
know how well that works, don't we Presidents Dean, Kerry, and Nader?

**How to Ignore Marketing and Become Irrelevant in Two Easy Steps**
by Steve Yegge: You may know Steve as the drunken guy blogging about
how much he hates Perl. He's sober in his talk about the brand meaning
of "open source", mostly by repeating case studies of big brands such
as Coke and GTE that every branding book copies from their
predecesors.

**Open or Closed? The Future of Search** by Jimmy Wales: Wikipedia
creator Jimmy Wales wants to harness the extra bandwidth out there for
a free web crawler. Because if everyone on my block helps out, not
only will I get slower internet service, but we'll all get the
Wikipedia equivalent of Google!

**Open Source Hardware: A Start...** with Phillip Torrone and
someone else: Definite *Star Trek level* going on when they talk
about 3-D printers and consumer-grade laser tools. Cool stuff, but not
my cup of tea.

**Open Source on the O'Reilly Radar** by Tim O'Reilly: You may have
heard it before, but there are a lot of first-timers at OSCON and they
haven't heard it. Have you noticed there's free wireless?

**Open Source Second Life** by Philip Rosedale: Philip talks about
some interesting uses of Second Life, and that there will be even more
interesting uses once people invent new and crazy things with the
tools they just open sourced. Didn't that Yegge guy just say that
everyone is tagging their stuff as "open source" without really
getting it?

**Overcoming Bias** by Robin Hanson: Robin says he has shocking,
new information about how we are all biased, we should work to
overcome it, and it's hopeless. Hey Robin, welcome to the freshman
Philosophy of Science course!

**Pimp My Garbage** by James Larsson: James is a hardware hacker
playing with electricity and fire, literally. Lose at pong and his
machine whips you with a riding crop with it's real time hardware
feedback!

**Open Source Therapy** by Nat Torkington: Nat plays the therapist
who teaches Perl, Linux. Ruby, and other open source lessons that
they should have learned from their parents. It's not quite classic
Nat because he isn't profane, but he's much more interesting
than the people he introduces.

**Transactional Memory for Concurrent Programming** by Simon
Peyton-Jones: Simon is the GHC guy. His talk is just like my limited
experience with Haskell. It looks and sounds really, really cool, but
after I walked away I realized I'd have to listen to it all again
because none of it sank in.

**Year in Review: Open Source at Microsoft** by Bill Hilf: Bill is
the Open Source Manager at Microsoft, and he's been to every OSCON and
was a former Perl programmer. He didn't get bummed-rushed by the GPL
assholes like Craig Mundie was several years ago.
