---
layout: post
title: Why are you rebooting?
categories: system-administration
tags: ubuntu hostname reboot
stopwords:
---

I want to change the hostname on my Ubuntu-based MacBook Air. It's easy
to find advice and tips on almost anything by googling the question. I'm
use to the `hostname` command, but that only lasts the session. I can
change */etc/hostname*, but that file is used at startup. So much of the high google
juice content suggests a reboot, such as [this nixCraft](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/ubuntu-change-hostname-command/).

<!--more-->

Why does so much of the Ubuntu advice I find nowadays say to change
something then reboot?

I think there are two reasons.

First, much of the advice out there is clickbait crap. Look around enough and
you'll see the same content in different wrapper. That's just a low-paid person
copying whatever they found first then moving on to the next thing.  But, it
also shows up in some places where I expect more:

*[DigitalOcean fails to correct it](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/questions/how-to-set-up-a-host-name-in-digitalocean) (and several other places).
*[The accepted answer](https://askubuntu.com/a/87687/912156) on AskUbuntu's question [How do I change the hostname without a restart?](https://askubuntu.com/q/87665/912156) says you have to restart.

A [less popular answer on AskUbuntu](https://askubuntu.com/a/516898/912156)
shows how to change it immediately and persist it through a reboot. This
sets the hostname to `enhydra`:

{% highlight text %}
$ hostnamectl set-hostname enhydra
{% endhighlight %}

This is really the same as using `hostname` to set the session hostname,
but also putting that same value in */etc/hostname* so it's used on
the next startup.

Along with that, you need to ensure that new hostname is in */etc/hosts*,
which you have to do on your own. When the system wonders what address it
should use, there needs to be a line pointing it to the loopback address:

{% highlight text %}
# /etc/hosts
127.0.0.1  enhydra
{% endhighlight %}

An [even less popular answer](https://askubuntu.com/a/103939/912156) points to the
service:

{% highlight text %}
$ sudo service hostname restart
{% endhighlight %}

Second, without any proof for this, I think that many people are coming
from environments where you were forced to restart. I once worked in a
room where I'd need to leave at 1:30pm to escape the sound of all the Windows
NT machines going through their daily reboot. Those environments weren't
made for computer-savvy people, so if something—anything—gets out of wack,
reset *everything* and try again. Sadly, I think macOS and its users are moving
in that direction.

Unix isn't supposed to be like that. Many Unix devotees pride themselves on
their uptime—how long it has been since the last restart. This value could be
years. If you needed to reset something, you could restart that service. However,
you not only had to know that you needed to restart something but what that was.
For example, you don't need to take down an Apache server to get configuration
changes; you can tell it to re-read its configuration.

But, when I read most of the other advice for unix tasks, I notice that
it's more about instructions about their editor than the actual task. When
you have to instruct people at such a low level, you get what you get. Reboot
is probably the easiest thing. For instance, if you change the hostname,
you probably need to adjust *xauth* so windowing still works (I'm a terminal
man myself). Still, that doesn't necessitate a reboot. It's just something
you don't ever remember how to do because it's so rare.

Now, there is some merit to restarting: you can see if what you did
works across the restart. However, that's a different beast. You don't *need*
to do that to get the effect.
