---
layout: post
title: Clumpers and Splitters
categories:
tags:
stopwords:
last_modified:
original_url:
---

There are two types of people in the world. Those

<!--more-->

I ran across the terms "clumpers" and "splitters" while reading about
the trade-offs in monolithic software thingys (say, a function) and
strictly decomposed version of that.

blah blah blah

# Gorillas in the library

This same thing happens in other domains. In information science,
something like the Dewey Decimal Classification either clumps or
splits. But, the clumps or splits it makes have consequences (the
"ghetto" or the "diaspora").

For example, where does something like Dian Fossey's [Gorillas in the
Mist](https://amzn.to/3qWNrsU) go? It lands in 599, which is the
subcategory "Mammals". But, it's literally "Social Science", which is
the 300 area in the Dewey system. But 300 isn't actually "Social
Science". That category might be better called "Human Society".

The physical copy has to exist in exactly one physical space, and for
that physical space to have any usefulness, one category must overrule
every other for some real human (or robot I guess) to find the item.
Subcategories, secondary categories, and whatever else you want to add
will add only minute value compared to the one category that locates
the shelf on which the book exists.

# But, racism

And this is exactly why people think the Dewey system is racist; any
classification has to choose some system to operate within. Dewey's is
that from a white American man who lived in the 19th century. We can't
be too hard on him though, because people will say the same thing
about your system a hundred and fifty years from now.

Despite what you think of Critical Race Theory, which has taken on
whatever meaning people need in the moment, know that there is a thing
called Critical Theory, and there is a thing called Critical Legal
Theory. Basically, people set up systems to solve their problems (or,
the problems as they see them). This is generally true and must be
true; it's a mistake to think it cannot or shouldn't be true. People
differ in how much evil they assign to this, and if it's the same
amount of evil in every decision.






